[CONTENT] Newsletter 101 - July 2021 news (#94)
reactos/web-content: content/blogs/newsletter-101.md

---
title:       "Newsletter 101 - July 2021 news"
author:      "Extravert34"
date:        2021-07-26
tags:        [ newsletter ]
---

Hello ReactOS followers! This report covers changes in the project during February-July 2021.
And we definitely have some things to highlight!

## amd64 build is getting more stable
Timo Kreuzer (tkreuzer) worked hard on various parts of the kernel and HAL, fixing issues here and there.
Structured Exception Handling (SEH) support for the amd64 architecture was finished, various bugs around the kernel are fixed.
A major issue with interrupt handling in HAL was also fixed in May, which finally allowed a semi-stable boot in a virtual environment.

## i686 APIC HAL now works
ReactOS historically uses a legacy HAL on i686 architecture, which works with good old Intel 8259 PIC's interfaces for interrupt handling.
This works in a single CPU environment, but for multiprocessor support, a more modern APIC interrupt handling is required.
Timo Kreuzer also did a great job here reviving old code for APIC support.

> APIC HAL can be installed now by choosing the corresponding menu entry in the installer.

Reviewer: Wasn't there Justin Miller part of this?

Reviewer 2: A lot what I did there was super seeded by a much better implementation, so I never really submitted it for review or anything as there wasn't a point. I've learned a whole bunch more sense then too and in hindsight it really wasn't that great.
However, the MADT/MPS tables are a thing that'll be part of it eventually be part of all the APIC HALs but that isn't part of master right now. Sooner then later it will be though.

> APIC HAL can be installed now by choosing the corresponding menu entry in the installer.

Reviewer: Suggestion (regarding the "menu entry in the installer") : add a screencapture.

## SMP GSoC project

> While preparing for the project, Jérôme Gardou (zefklop) and Thomas Faber (thfabba) were testing the kernel build in SMP mode,

Reviewer 2: This actually only works on the x64 build at the current moment.

Author: Yeah, because of APIC issues still not resolved completely

> but running on a VM with only one CPU assigned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but running on a VM with multiple CPUs assigned leads to only one being active.
```

> Default single-CPU build of ReactOS removes some code which is not neccessary for an
> execution on such machines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Our default single-CPU build of ReactOS lacks some code which is not necessary for an
execution on such machines.
```

Such SMP build revealed issues in kernel locking primitives and bugs in some drivers, which
were successfully [fixed](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/3672).

> // Justin, put some info about your project here

Reviewer 2: Timo Kreuzer expanded the functionality of the APIC implementation to allow for better interrupt handling of other cores in the system.
Justin Miller has started implementing the SMP version of the ACPI APIC HAL into ReactOS which will allow for multicore support; With the SMP code being generic ReactOS will also get support for other SMP enabled HALs.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

## `iernonce` GSoC project
He Yang started to work on `iernonce` under the guidance of his mentor George Bișoc and Hermès Bélusca. ReactOS already supported `RunOnce` registry allowing command execution on machine startup/user login. `iernonce` will enable users to use `RunOnceEx` registry to execute multiple commands in order, with a dialog displaying the progress on machine startup/user login.
```

Reviewer: I wonder, whether a screenshot could be added?

Author: Send me one ;)

> ## IsaPnP

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## ISA PnP
```

Dmitry Borisov (disean) [made](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/3467) a massive improvement to our ISA bus driver (isapnp.sys),

> which opens the possibility to use older PnP ISA hardware like sound cards and networking adapters.

Reviewer 5: Disk controllers are important too :)
```suggestion
which opens the possibility to use older PnP ISA hardware like disk controllers, sound cards, and networking adapters.
```

Those are now detected properly and can be used in the system when an appropriate driver is installed.

{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-101/isapnp.png" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-101/isapnp.png" >}}

## Sanitizers & Clang build
Jérôme Gardou finally fixed building ReactOS with the Clang compiler and such a build was added to our GitHub CI.
The build is not able to boot yet but the project can already benefit from additional static analysis capabilities of LLVM infrastructure.

Victor Perevertkin (extravert34) revived his Google Sanitizers [branch](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/2527) which is going to benefit
from the Clang support even more and greatly improve the developer experience.

## Input Method Manager library
ReactOS supports many languages already but some of them require an extra effort for a proper support.
The Input Method Manager library (imm32.dll) backs the support for all language-specific input methods.

> Katayama Hirofumi MZ (katahiromz) has started a rewrite of the imm32.dll to improve the Japanese language support. The work can be seen on [GitHub](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/commits/master/dll/win32/imm32/)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Katayama Hirofumi MZ (katahiromz) has started a rewrite of the imm32.dll to improve the Japanese language support. The work can be seen on [GitHub](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/commits/master/dll/win32/imm32/).
```

## Multiple monitors support

> Hervé Poussineau (hpoussin) started improving the videoprt.sys driver so it supports displaying an image on multiple monitors.

Reviewer 3: Three times "so" in a row, let's improve that a little bit:

```suggestion
Hervé Poussineau (hpoussin) started improving the videoprt.sys driver to let it support displaying an image on multiple monitors.
```

Reviewer: "displaying an image" sounds quite limiting xD

> So far only a wallpaper is displayed on a secondary ones, so the work is in progress.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So far only a wallpaper is displayed on the secondary monitors, but expect more in the future.
```

{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-101/multiple-monitors.jpg" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-101/multiple-monitors.jpg" >}}

## Other highlights

> - Jérôme Gardou continues his paid contract on improving memory manager (MM) stability. MM bugs for amd64 architecture have been fixed, and many other issues not tied to the platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Jérôme Gardou continues his paid contract on improving the memory manager (MM) stability. MM bugs for amd64 architecture have been fixed, and many other issues not tied to the platform.
```

- Various fixes have been done around user and kernel mode PnP subsystem for better driver compatibility. (Victor Perevertkin and Eric Kohl)

> - George Bișoc steadily improves our Security (SE) kernel subsystem for better applications compatibility.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- George Bișoc steadily improves our Security (SE) kernel subsystem for better application compatibility.
```

> - George Bișoc steadily improves our Security (SE) kernel subsystem for better applications compatibility.

Reviewer 6: Maybe mention the work regarding information classes alignment probing in Ps of the kernel as well?

Author: These are highlights, I don't want to bury too much into describing every issue. Do you think it is worth mentioning?

Reviewer: I think, that could be summarized (without too much verbiage) by "improved parameter validation/sanity checks".

## Expanding Matrix presence

> We are expanding our presence in Matrix universe and created a dedicated space for the project. Join the discussion in our Matrix space #reactos:reactos.org.

Reviewer 5: Clickable Matrix URL
```suggestion
We are expanding our presence in Matrix universe and created a dedicated space for the project. Join the discussion in our Matrix space [#reactos:reactos.org](https://matrix.to/#/#reactos:reactos.org?via=reactos.org).
```

Reviewer: in **the** Matrix universe

---
title:       "Newsletter 101 - July 2021 news"
author:      "Extravert34"
date:        2021-07-26
tags:        [ newsletter ]
---

Hello ReactOS followers! This report covers changes in the project during February-July 2021.

> And definitely have some things to highlight!

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
And we definitely have some things to highlight!
```

## amd64 build is getting more stable

> Timo Kreuzer (tkreuzer) worked hard on various parts of the kernel and HAL fixing issues here and there.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Timo Kreuzer (tkreuzer) worked hard on various parts of the kernel and HAL, fixing issues here and there.
```

> Structured Exception Handling (SEH) support for the amd64 architecture was finished, various bugs
> around the kernel are fixed.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Structured Exception Handling (SEH) support for the amd64 architecture was finished, various bugs around the kernel are fixed.
```

> A major issue with interrupt handling in HAL was also fixed in May, which finally allowed a semi-stable boot
> in virtual environment.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
A major issue with interrupt handling in HAL was also fixed in May, which finally allowed a semi-stable boot in a virtual environment.
```

## i686 APIC HAL now works

> ReactOS historically uses a legacy HAL on i686 architecture, which works with good old Intel 8259 PIC's interfaces
> for interrupt handling. This works in a single CPU environment, but for multiprocessor support, a more modern APIC
> interrupt handling is required. Timo Kreuzer also made a great job here reviving an old code for APIC support.
> APIC HAL can be installed now by choosing the corresponding menu entry in the installer.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
ReactOS historically uses a legacy HAL on i686 architecture, which works with good old Intel 8259 PIC's interfaces for interrupt handling.
This works in a single CPU environment, but for multiprocessor support, a more modern APIC interrupt handling is required.
Timo Kreuzer also did a great job here reviving old code for APIC support.
APIC HAL can be installed now by choosing the corresponding menu entry in the installer.
```

## SMP GSoC project
While preparing for the project, Jérôme Gardou (zefklop) and Thomas Faber (thfabba) were testing the kernel build in SMP mode,

> but running on a VM with only one CPU assigned. Default single-CPU build of ReactOS removes some code which is not neccessary for an
> execution on such machines. Such SMP build revealed issues in kernel locking primitives and bugs in some drivers, which
> were successfully [fixed](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/3672).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
but running on a VM with only one CPU assigned.
Default single-CPU build of ReactOS removes some code which is not neccessary for an
execution on such machines.
Such SMP build revealed issues in kernel locking primitives and bugs in some drivers, which
were successfully [fixed](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/3672).
```

// Justin, put some info about your project here

## IsaPnP
Dmitry Borisov (disean) [made](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/3467) a massive improvement to our ISA bus driver (isapnp.sys),

> which opens the possibility to use older PnP ISA hardware like sound cards and networking adapters. Those are now detected
> properly and can be used in the system when an appropriate driver is installed.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
which opens the possibility to use older PnP ISA hardware like sound cards and networking adapters.
Those are now detected properly and can be used in the system when an appropriate driver is installed.
```

{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-101/isapnp.png" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-101/isapnp.png" >}}

## Sanitizers & Clang build

> Jérôme Gardou finally fixed building ReactOS with the Clang compiler and such a build was added to our GitHub CI. The build is not able to
> boot yet but the project can already benefit from additional static analysis capabilities of LLVM infrastructure.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Jérôme Gardou finally fixed building ReactOS with the Clang compiler and such a build was added to our GitHub CI.
The build is not able to boot yet but the project can already benefit from additional static analysis capabilities of LLVM infrastructure.
```

Victor Perevertkin (extravert34) revived his Google Sanitizers [branch](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/2527) which is going to benefit
from the Clang support even more and greatly improve the developer experience.

## Input Method Manager library

> ReactOS supports many languages already but some of them require an extra effort for a proper support. The Input Method Manager library (imm32.dll)
> backs the support for all language-specific input methods. Katayama Hirofumi MZ (katahiromz) has started a rewrite of the imm32.dll to improve
> the Japanese language support. The work can be seen on [GitHub](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/commits/master/dll/win32/imm32/)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
ReactOS supports many languages already but some of them require an extra effort for a proper support.
The Input Method Manager library (imm32.dll) backs the support for all language-specific input methods.
Katayama Hirofumi MZ (katahiromz) has started a rewrite of the imm32.dll to improve the Japanese language support. The work can be seen on [GitHub](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/commits/master/dll/win32/imm32/)
```

## Multiple monitors support

> Hervé Poussineau (hpoussin) started improving the videoprt.sys driver so it supports displaying an image on multiple monitors. So far only a walpaper
> is displayed on a secondary ones, so the work is in progress.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Hervé Poussineau (hpoussin) started improving the videoprt.sys driver so it supports displaying an image on multiple monitors.
So far only a wallpaper is displayed on a secondary ones, so the work is in progress.
```

{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-101/multiple-monitors.jpg" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-101/multiple-monitors.jpg" >}}

## Other highlights

> - Jérôme Gardou continues his paid contract on improving memory manager (MM) stability. MM bugs for amd64 architecture have been fixed
>   so had many other issues not tied to the platform.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Jérôme Gardou continues his paid contract on improving memory manager (MM) stability. MM bugs for amd64 architecture have been fixed, and many other issues not tied to the platform.
```

---
title:       "Newsletter 101 - July 2021 news"
author:      "Extravert34"
date:        2021-07-28
tags:        [ newsletter ]
---

Hello ReactOS followers! This report covers changes in the project during February-July 2021.
And we definitely have some things to highlight!

## amd64 build is getting more stable
Timo Kreuzer (tkreuzer) worked hard on various parts of the kernel and HAL, fixing issues here and there.
Structured Exception Handling (SEH) support for the amd64 architecture was finished, various bugs around the kernel are fixed.
A major issue with interrupt handling in HAL was also fixed in May, which finally allowed a semi-stable boot in a virtual environment.

Only MSVC compiler can produce working 64bit builds at the moment, but this is going to change soon with the upcoming RosBE 2.3
release.

> For the first time, we are going to have an official GCC for building for amd64.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For the first time, we are going to have an official GCC for building the amd64 version.
```

The build environment is currently in beta and we already found a few last issues, but as soon as they are fixed, it will be the new official release.

In particular, we waited for the final [Binutils 2.37 release](https://sourceware.org/pipermail/binutils/2021-July/117384.html) to include that version in the final RosBE 2.3.
It comes with an important [addition](https://sourceware.org/git/?p=binutils-gdb.git;a=commitdiff;h=d039200a7ee8ac170afbdc3b987af553c07fb6a3) by Jérôme Gardou (zefklop). Apart from that, we still need to change the way GMP is built with GCC to fix GCC plugin support.

> When both is done, RosBE 2.3 will most likely go live simultaneously for Windows, Linux, and macOS.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When both are done, RosBE 2.3 will most likely go live simultaneously for Windows, Linux, and macOS.
```

{{< /gallery >}}

## SMP GSoC project
While preparing for the project, Jérôme Gardou and Thomas Faber (thfabba) were testing the kernel build in SMP mode,
but running on a VM with only one CPU assigned.
Our default single-CPU build of ReactOS lacks some code which is not necessary for an
execution on such machines.
Such SMP build revealed issues in kernel locking primitives and bugs in some drivers, which
were successfully [fixed](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/3672).

Our GSoC student, Justin Miller (The_DarkFire) has started implementing the SMP version of the ACPI APIC HAL into ReactOS
which will allow for multicore support.
With the SMP code being generic ReactOS will also get support for other SMP enabled HALs and architectures.

## `iernonce` GSoC project
He Yang (kernel.bin), the 2nd year GSoC student started working on `iernonce` under the guidance of his mentor George Bișoc (GeoB99) and Hermès Bélusca (hbelusca).
ReactOS already supports `RunOnce` registry entry which allows command execution upon machine startup/user login.

> `iernonce` will add a possibility to use `RunOnceEx` entry to execute multiple commands in an order, with a dialog displaying progress upon machine startup/user login.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`iernonce` will add a possibility to use `RunOnceEx` entry to execute multiple commands in order, with a dialog displaying progress upon machine startup/user login.
```

## ISA PnP
Dmitry Borisov (disean) [made](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/3467) a massive improvement to our ISA bus driver (`isapnp.sys`),

> which opens the possibility to use older Plug and Play ISA hardware like disk controllers, sound cards, or networking adapters.
> Those are now detected properly and can be used in the system when an appropriate driver is installed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
which opens the possibility to use older Plug and Play ISA hardware, like disk controllers, sound cards, or networking adapters.
They are now detected properly and can be used in the system when an appropriate driver is installed.
```
